# OME Functions & Supporting Infrastructure

To properly provide the necessary services identified in both {{RFC9153}} and {{RFC9434}} a DIME, or more generally an OME, requires four critical functions: *Registrar*, *Registry*, *Authoritative Name Server* and *Certificate Authority* as detailed below for this document and in {{arch-fig}}.

*Registrar*:
: This document covers the client facing interface of the Registrar function used by Registrants. Interactions done by the Registrar with other OME functions are out of scope for this document.

*Registry*:
: This document covers the client facing interface of the Registry function used by Observers to query for additional details about the HHIT. Interactions done by the Registry with other OME functions are out of scope for this document. It should be noted that artifacts generated during the registration process specified in this document MUST end up in the Registry for audit purposes. For this document the term Registry is short-hand for Private Information Registry as defined in {{Section 4.2 of RFC9434}}.

*Authoritative Name Server*:
: The specific details of records hosted by the Authoritative Name Server as part of DNS is specified in {{RFC9886}} and are out of scope for this document. Interactions done by other OME functions to manage an Authoritative Name Server are out of scope for this document. It should be noted that some artifacts generated during the registration process specified in this document end up in RRTypes hosted in DNS. This function serves as the Public Information Registry as defined by {{Section 4.1 of RFC9434}}.

*Certificate Authority*:
: This document does not cover specific details of this function of an OME. However, it is expected to provide at least ORCHID Key Infrastructure X.509 (OKIX) certificates used in other parts of the OME. These are {{RFC5280}} compliant certificates that support HHITs, see {{oki}}. Explicit policy for Certificate Authorities are left for more specific implementation and documents, such as a Concept of Operations.

~~~ ascii-art
{::include figures/arch.txt}
~~~
{: #arch-fig title="Simplified Diagram of Registration/Query Components & Interactions" artwork-align="center"}

The specific interaction models and transports between all of these functions when not co-located (i.e. as a distributed system of systems) is out of scope for this document and are represented by dotted lines (`.` and `:` between `x`'s) in {{arch-fig}}. Note that of the duplicate links feeding *Authoritative Name Server* and *Registry* one set is chosen for implementation for each. A number of these functions/interactions are lifted from the DNS and the existing relationships and protocols between such entities in that domain also can apply here. For example, between *Registrar* and *Registry* is the Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP, {{STD69}}) or equivalents such as RESTful Provisioning Protocol (RPP).

This document only details the interaction between a registering client (known as *Registrant*) and the *Registrar* through an HTTPS interface as descried in {{registration-process}} and the RDAP interaction by *Querants* (such as *Observers*) and a *Registry* as described in {{query-process}}. These interactions are denoted by the solid lines (`-` and `|` between `o`'s) of {{arch-fig}}. These interfaces can be either used by machines as an API or provided with a UI for humans to interact with such as on a web browser. 

The elements of any maps found in CDDL for this specification MUST be declared by an ecosystem. An initial key set for elements in aviation use cases are registered in {{iana-ak}}. Context MAY be provided in-band in HTTP using a registered Media Type as part of the Content-Type header for what key set to use to avoid processing ambiguity.

## ORCHID Key Infrastructure (OKI) {#oki}

ORCHID Key Infrastructure (OKI) follows a pattern of hierarchy starting at the IPv6 address prefix as the apex and traverses down the levels of the HHITs Hierarchy ID field. For DETs this maps `2001:30/28` as the apex then RAA and HDA respectively as is shown in {{oki-fig}}.

~~~~ ascii-art
{::include figures/oki.txt}
~~~~
{: #oki-fig title="ORCHID Key Infrastructure (OKI) Hierarchy"  artwork-align="center"}

Each hierarchy level SHOULD have at least one Authorization HHIT. These are used to endorse the next level downwards in the hierarchy (Apex > RAA, RAA > HDA). Additionally each level MAY have as many Issuing HHITs as desired and are endorsed by the local-level Authorization HHIT. Issuing HHITs are used to endorse Operational HHITs within the scope of authority. 

This document allocates two new HHIT Entity Types in each level of hierarchy for this purpose, one for Authorization and one for Issuing ({{iana-entity-types}}).

Specific policies for these hierarchy levels are out of scope for this document and are expected to be developed into OKI policy guidance or added to existing PKI policy guidance for each use-case.

### Hierarchy Responsibilities 

An OME has a number of responsibilities depending on its place in the hierarchy. This section covers the technical responsibilities of each level of an HHIT's hierarchy as defined in {{RFC9374}}.

#### General

All OMEs have the following general requirements.

- MAY register Operational entities that share Hierarchy ID value that are endorsed using an Issuing HHIT
- all endorsements MUST result in OKIX-compliant certificates
- MUST provide to prospective *Registrants* any requirements, policy and/or guidance for registration
  - This information SHOULD be publicly accessible
- MUST maintain HHIT entity registrations with relevant Personally Identifiable Information (PII) as required by their jurisdiction
- MUST fulfill any jurisdiction requirements that are not defined and are out of scope for this document
- SHOULD implement the HTTP interfaces of {{registration-process}} and {{query-process}}
  - MAY have Not Implemented responses if the service is not provided
- All non-Operational entities MUST provide NS RRType(s) as needed to support DNS delegation to parent entities during registration

#### Apex

In addition to the general requirements, the following applies to an OME acting in the role of an Apex.

- MUST allocate RAA values to prospective entities that satisfy policy and/or technical requirements
- MUST maintain the reverse zones of the IPv6 prefix that contain delegations of the associated RAA values and RRTypes of registered entities
- MAY have at least one Authorization HHIT endorsed by itself
- MAY have at least one Issuing HHIT endorsed by an Apex Authorization HHIT
- MAY endorse non-Operational entities in their scope using an Authorization HHIT
- MAY endorse Operational entities in their scope using an Issuing HHIT

#### RAA

In addition to the general requirements, the following applies to an OME acting in the role of an RAA.

- MUST have at least one Authorization HHIT endorsed by an Apex Authorization HHIT or itself
- MAY have at least one Issuing HHIT endorsed by an RAA Authorization HHIT
- MUST allocate HDA values to prospective entities that satisfy policy and/or technical requirements
  - Allocation methods of HDA values are at the discretion of the RAA and their policies
- MUST maintain the reverse zones of the RAA that contain delegations of the associated HDA values and RRTypes of registered entities
- MUST endorse non-Operational entities in their scope using an Authorization HHIT
- MAY endorse Operational entities in their scope using an Issuing HHIT
- MAY mutually cross-certify with other RAAs

#### HDA

In addition to the general requirements, the following applies to an OME acting in the role of an HDA.

- MUST have at least one Authorization HHIT endorsed by an RAA Authorization HHIT
- SHOULD have at least one Issuing HHIT endorsed by an HDA Authorization HHIT
- MUST NOT endorse non-Operational entities in their scope
- MUST endorse Operational entities in their scope using an Issuing HHIT
- MUST maintain the reverse zones of the HDA that contain RRTypes of registered entities

### ORCHID Key Infrastructure X.509 (OKIX) {#okix}

Existing Public Key Infrastructure X.509 (PKIX) certificate profiles can be augmented to support HHITs creating a ORCHID Key Infrastructure X.509 (OKIX) profile. The following key augmentations are REQUIRED when supporting HHITs:

*Issuer Subject*:
: When HHITs are deployed for identities, certificates being signed using an HHITs key MUST include the IPv6 address string as the Issuer Subject under a Common Name (CN).

*Subject Alternative Name: IP6*:
: This OID MUST be included at all levels of the OKI to indicate the Subjects HHIT. The Subject Alternative Name MUST be marked as critical.

*Subject Alternative Name: URI*:
: This OID is used to indicate where the Private Information Registry for this entity or entities endorsed by it can be found. It SHOULD be at the HDA-level but MAY be on individual Operational certificates.

*Subject*:
: For Operational HHITs the Subject SHOULD be empty. Other levels of the hierarchy MAY use Subject or have specific requirements on its contents.

Other X.509 fields and OIDs MAY be required in a given jurisdiction. This is up to the original PKI(X) policy if applicable and is out of scope for this document.