# Registration {#home-registration}

This sections details the process of registration following {{art-z-registration}}. This Z-diagram is the upper link of {{arch-fig}} labeled with "HOME Token/HTTPS" between *Registrant* and *Registrar*.

~~~ ascii-art
{::include figures/ascii-art/z-registration.txt}
~~~
{: #art-z-registration title="Registration Z-Diagram" artwork-align="center"}

The mechanism for registration is the use of COSE or JOSE over HTTPS. COSE MUST be supported and JOSE is RECOMMENDED for flexibility for non-constrained *Registrants*. The rest of this section specifies exact behavior for this interface of an HOME.

## HOME Token {#home-token}

A HOME Token MUST be encoded in either COSE or JOSE. A token MAY contain multiple layers and SHOULD have the Content-Type parameter, as part of an unprotected header, set accordingly for each.

### Signature Layer

Respective header parameters MUST be used to indicate the verification key. When the key is part of the payload (usually an HRI claim set, {{hri}}) a protected header parameter MUST be used (`jwk` for JOSE and `kccs` for COSE) to carry the verification key to avoid needing to parse the payload segment of the structure. For all other cases a KID parameter is used containing an HHIT, encoded per {{ip6-handling}}, and placed in a unprotected header.

### Encryption Layer

HOME Tokens SHOULD be encrypted when the payload may contain Personally Identifiable Information (PII). For example, a HOME would not encrypt their response token ({{hrr}}) containing relevant processing errors when the original request token ({{hri}}) failed to decrypt.

Asymmetric algorithms MUST be supported and symmetric MAY be supported. The precise list of encryption algorithm selected and policies are left for the HOME to decide and MUST be provided to clients.

Encryption is done with Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) using Ephemeral-Static (ES) keying. The static key is provided by the HOME while a unique ephemeral key is provided by the client for each HOME Token and/or recipient. The transfer of this ephemeral key is covered by the relevant COSE/JOSE specifications for using ECDH with encryption objects. The HOME MUST provide its static keys through public methods such as the DNS or an HTTPS GET endpoint.

## Claims Set

A HOME Token is at its core a set of claims using a CWT or JWT claim set. The claims defined in this section are registered in the respective registries in {{iana-claims}} and either or both MUST be included in the claim set for HOME Tokens. A HOME Token carrying either of these claims is considered as an HRI Token or HRR Token respectively.

The claim set SHOULD also contain the claims of `nbf`, `exp`, and `iat`. The set MAY contain the `aud` or `iss` claim with a targeted HHIT, encoded per {{ip6-handling}}, if known. Additional claims are out of scope for this document.

The layer ({{signature-layer}} or {{encryption-layer}}) carrying a claim set is RECOMMENDED to set the Content-Type parameter, as part of the unprotected header, to `application/home+cbor` or `application/home+json`. This SHOULD include the `ctx` parameter to indicate the set of keys/parameters being used for any maps in the payload structure as they are application specific.

### HOME Registration Inquiry (HRI) {#hri}

The structure of an HRI claim is around registration of a set of entities, each uniquely identified by the *Registrant* that contains keys (also each uniquely identified) and metadata for each.

~~~ ascii-text
{::include cddl/request.cddl}
~~~
{: #cddl-hri title="CDDL: HOME Registration Inquiry"}

*entities*:
: A map containing elements using key (*entity-id*), value (*entity*) pairs for each *entity* being registered in the inquiry.

*entity-id*:
: A string or integer key, as part of the *entities* map, set by the *Registrant*. 

*entity*:
: An array containing the elements of *hhit_entity_type*, *keys* and *metadata*.

*hhit_entity_type*:
: An HHIT Entity Type as defined in the registry found at {{IANA.DRIP}}.

*keys*:
: A map containing the key (*key-id*), value (*key*) pairs for the keys being registered entity in the inquiry for a given *entity*.

*key-id*:
: A string or integer key, as part of the *keys* map for each *entity*, set by the *Registrant*. Constrained in uniqueness to an individual HRI and the keys as part of an *entity*.

*key*:
: An array containing the elements of *csr* and *metadata*.

*csr*:
: OKI(X)-compliant Certificate Signing Request (CSR) that is DER encoded. See {{key-csr}} for considerations on the CSR.

*metadata*:
: A map containing elements (key, value pairs) and their associated values related to keys/entities in the inquiry. The contents are subject to policy of an HOME and MUST be provided to their clients. The specific key set to be used SHOULD be indicated using the optional parameter of the registered Media Type ({{iana-mt}}) as part of a Content-Type parameter. An initial key set is registered in {{iana-hp}}.

Each nesting in {{cddl-hri}} contains its own *metadata*. This allows a *Registrant* to set elements at a higher nesting in the model to be shared among nested sections. When combining from each nesting level, elements found closer to the `entities[entity-id].keys[key-id].metadata` map are given priority.

### HOME Registration Response (HRR) {#hrr}

This claim is structured to use the provided *entity-id*s and *key-id*s from an HRI. It also can contain a list of failures, organized by those same identifiers.

~~~ ascii-text
{::include cddl/response.cddl}
~~~
{: #cddl-hrr title="CDDL: HOME Registration Response"}

*success*:
: An array containing two elements: *entities* and *shared*. MUST be `null` when no successful registrations issued by the HOME.

*entities*:
: A map of elements with key (*entity-id*), value (*success-data*) pairs.

*entity-id*:
: A string or integer key, as part of the *entities* map, provided in an HRI from a *Registrant*.

*success-data*:
: An array containing two elements: *keys* and *shared*.

*keys*:
: A map of elements with key (*key-id*), value pairs. The value of each element is a map (keys from {{iana-hp}}) containing artifacts of the registration associated with the specific key and MUST have an element containing the Canonical Registration Certificate.

*key-id*:
: A string or integer key, as part of the *keys* map, provided in an HRI from a *Registrant*.

*shared*:
: Same as the *metadata* field of HRI except contains artifact elements provided to the *Registrant* for successful registration that is shared amongst either a set of *keys* or set of *entities*.

*failure*:
: An array with at least one element of *error-data* to indicate failures, `null` otherwise.

*error-data*:
: An array of four elements encoding a validation or processing error of an HRI. When *eid* or *kid* are `null` it implies that all of that type are denoting the same failure explained via *cat* and/or *msg*. When both *eid* and *kid* are `null` it indicates the processing of the HRI token itself or all keys across the HRI entities shared the same failure indicated by *cat* and/or *msg*. See {{response-codes}} for more details.

Similar to the *metadata* in the HRI, {{cddl-hrr}} has an *shared* map at each level for data that is the identical across different keys/entities. When combining from each nesting level, elements found closer to those in the `success.entities[entity-id].keys[key-id]` map are given priority.

## Considerations

### Keys & Certificate Signing Request {#key-csr}

*Registrant*s obtains one or more Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs) that are OKI(X)-compliant by either generating their own key-pair(s), RECOMMENDED asymmetric, or obtaining them from a related party they are acting as a proxy for.

Cryptographic materials SHOULD be on the device intending to use said material in operation. If the *Registrant* is acting as a proxy the methods of the generation and/or transfer of cryptographic materials to and from the device being proxied to is out of scope for this document.

If the *Registrant* knows the HID of the *Registar* and/or *Certificate Authority* it wishes to be endorsed by, it SHOULD construct its HHIT accordingly and include it in the CSR per {{okix-csr}}. The process of discovering a specific HID is out of scope for this document.

### Registration Endpoint

The `/.well-known/home/registry` endpoint SHOULD be redirected to a fully qualified path by the HOME and MUST use `308 Permanent Redirect`.

### HRI Validation & Processing {#req-valid}

HRI validation and processing is done across two functional components, which can be co-located or distributed, the *Registrar* and *Certificate Authority*. The following text is based on the processing of an HRI Token. The HOME in question uses a single HHIT for both its *Registrar* and *Certificate Authority* roles. 

The initial steps of decryption and signature validation are skipped as they are straightforward. Failure of either of these steps results in sending a response following {{response-codes}}. Assuming success the claim set is extracted from the HRI Token to be processed.

The `nbf`, `ext`, `iat`, `iss` and `aud` claims are validated, and then `hri` claim is processed recursively starting from the outside of the structure. Each entity merges their *metadata* with the inquiry *metadata* with entity elements taking precedence. Next each key merges its *metadata* with the entity *metadata* with key elements taking precedence. The HOME performs validation of the final combined *metadata* map for each key using local validation and/or consultation of an "oracle" (see {{oaas}}).

Next each key CSR has its signature validated then the public key confirmed to be unique to the HOME's scope. The HOME then constructs, using its Hierarchy HID and the CSR public key, a prospective HHIT for the key. If the CSR contains an HHIT as part of the Subject Alternative Name the two HHITs are checked for equivalence. The HOME finally checks that the HHIT is unique in its scope.

If everything above validates, the HOME endorses the new HHIT by generating and signing an OKI(x)-compliant Canonical Registration Certificate along with any other artifacts required for the entity registration. Any data for the *Registrant* is then placed within the HRR `success.entities[entity-id].keys[key-id]` map using the same *entity-id* and *key-id* from the HRI. All artifacts of this endorsement are placed in the *Registry* and artifacts that are considered public, such as those needed for {{RFC9886}}, are placed into the *Authoritative Name Server*.

When a failure occurs at any point in the validation and/or processing of a entity/key the HRR *failure* array is appended using the *entity-id*, *key-id* and other elements to provide context for the issue. The HOME MAY compress the *failure* array after processing. For example if all the keys for an *entity-id* share the same failure the individual structures can be compressed to a single `[<eid>, null, <cat>, <msg>]` instead of one for each *key-id*.

The HOME upon handling all entities and keys a HOME constructs an HRR Token and responds to the *Registrant* with it. The token SHOULD replicate the same layering as the original HRI Token. It MAY contain both the original HRI claim and the associated HRR claim. 

## Transport

This document defines the use of HTTPS as the transport for the HOME Tokens. The use of other transports are out of scope for this document.

For COSE, the resulting CBOR content MUST use a proper CBOR Tag to indicate what object is encoded. For JOSE content, the General or Flattened JWE JSON Serialization syntax MUST be used. 

The "Content-Type" header of HTTPS SHOULD be used to indicate the content typing. For JOSE this is `application/jose+json` and for COSE is one of the following: `application/cose; cose-type="cose-sign`, `application/cose; cose-type="cose-sign1`, `application/cose; cose-type="cose-encrypt`, `application/cose; cose-type="cose-encrypt0`.

### Response Codes

For HOME Tokens with a single entity/key object the HTTP Response Codes can be easily mapped. For example a key that fails processing due to a duplicate public key or HHIT can have the HOME Token returned using `409 Conflict`. It is also simple for the first stages of an HOME Token carrying an HRI since it needs to successfully be decrypted and signature(s) before processing resulting in earlier failure conditions to respond to.

HOME Tokens with multiple entities/keys can be trivially mapped as well only when all entities/keys either pass or fail. Difficulty arises when a HOME Token has multiple entities/keys and not all of them fail or they all fail in different ways that can be attributed to either a 4xx or 5xx code.

For the above reasoning and to maintain interoperability HOMEs MUST follow the below guidelines for management of HTTP Response Codes and using the HRR claim's *failure* array and *error-data* structure. Unless otherwise noted a responding HOME Token MUST use both encryption and signature layers.

**422 Unprocessable Content**:
: When a HOME Token fails to decrypt this response code MUST be sent with only a signature layer ({{signature-layer}}) signaling in the HRR claim the decryption issue(s) experienced. The *eid*, *kid* and *cat* fields MUST be set to `null`. The *msg* SHOULD contains specific details about the failed decryption. More than one *error-data* MAY be present for different decryption issues.

**401 Unauthorized**:
: Failed signature(s) of a HOME Token MUST use this response code with the HRR claim indicating the signature validation issue(s) experienced. The *eid*, *kid* and *cat* fields MUST be set to `null`. The *msg* SHOULD contains specific details about what signature failed to verify. More than one *error-data* MAY be present to separate signature(s) processed.

**200 OK**:
: This response code MUST be used to indicate the overall inquiry has been processed but that some entities and/or keys failed to be registered. The *cat* field SHOULD be used to carry the respective 4xx or 5xx HTTP Response Code exhibited for the entities/keys to fail validation or processing. If *cat* is not used, then clients MUST check contents of both the *success* and *failure* fields of the HRR.

**201 Created**:
: A response with this code MUST be used when all entities and keys in the original HRI were registered successfully and the *failure* in HRR MUST be set to `null`.

**4xx or 5xx**:
: If all entities/keys fail with the same *cat*, used as in *200 OK*, then the HOME Token is sent using that HTTP Response Code. The *failure* array in the HRR MUST be filled with *error-data*'s setting *eid* and *kid* as needed, *cat* to `null` and *msg* to any specific details for the given *eid*/*kid* pair.

