# Security Considerations {#sc}

The considerations discussed in {{RFC9153}}, {{RFC9374}}, {{RFC9434}} and {{DET-DNS}} apply.

## AAA

HMEs use and provide various methods to protect data through: Attestation, Authentication, Authorization, Access Control, Attribution, Accounting, and Audit (AAA). All data, handled under DRIP, MUST be protected by AAA, as per applicable regulation and policy (which, in some cases, for public data, may impose minimal requirements). All private data MUST also be protected by strong encryption where permitted by applicable law etc. These requirements apply to data at rest and in transit in all phases of the process, i.e. registration and query.

Attestation may be mandated by a jurisdiction for devices. Remote ATtestation ProcedureS (RATS, {{RFC9334}}) is recommended for such mandates. The specific attestation mechanisms are out of scope for this document.

## Cryptographic Materials

Best practices dictate that cryptographic materials that should only be available to selected parties SHOULD be generated by one or more of those parties and stored accessibly only on those parties devices. E.g. the asymmetric key-pair from which an HHIT will be derived SHOULD be generated by the entity identified by that HHIT and the corresponding private key should be stored only on that entity's device. There may be scenarios where other parts of a system, such as a UAS, generates the cryptographic materials and provision them as needed during an operation. Any such system MUST ensure security of the cryptographic material is guaranteed.