# CDDL & Encoding Rules {#cddl}

This appendix is normative.

## Prelude

The HOME CDDL Prelude of {{cddl-prelude}} is built upon the prelude defined in {{Appendix E of RFC8610}} to allow interoperability with JSON encodings. The conversion of fields to/from CBOR and JSON MUST use the advice in {{Section 6 of RFC8949}}.

~~~ ascii-text
{::include cddl/prelude.cddl}
~~~
{: #cddl-prelude title="CDDL: HOME Prelude"}

## HRI & HRR Claims

The full claim set for HRI and HRR, including prelude, are shown in {{cddl-claims}}.

~~~ ascii-text
{::include cddl/claims.cddl}
~~~
{: #cddl-claims title="CDDL: HRI & HRR Claims"}

## IPv6 Handling {#ip6-handling}

IPv6 addresses MUST be tagged using {{RFC9164}} when encoded in CBOR. For JSON, IPv6 addresses MUST be an address string as defined in {{RFC4291, Section 2.2}}.

## HOME Common Parameters

~~~ ascii-text
hhit = [
  ip6: #6.54(bytes .size(16)) / text, ; ip6 addr tstr
  hhit_entity_type: uint
]
vnb = tdate / time
vna = tdate / time / number
publish = bool
csr = bytes / text .b64u bytes ; DER encoded
oracle_x = bytes / text .b64u bytes ; DER encoded
canon_x = bytes / text .b64u bytes ; DER encoded
canon_chain = [ bytes / text .b64u bytes ] ; DER encoded
contact = text ; b64 encoded jCard object
~~~
{: #cddl-hcp title="CDDL: HOME Common Parameters"}

### VNB & VNA Handling

The inclusion of the valid not before (VNB) and valid not after (VNA) parameters to the `metadata` map of {{hri-model}} allows a *Registrant* to set very specific validity times for their registration.

VNB when present is always an absolute time reference per its typing. VNA is either an absolute time reference (like VNB) or a positive offset in seconds (to be added to the VNB absolute time). Negative values of VNA MUST be considered an encoding error.

> Implementation Note: due to not differentiating between integers and floats in its number type, implementations using JSON as the encoded format MUST check the value of VNA to determine if its being used as an offset or absolute time.

When VNB is not present in the `metadata` map the HOME MUST use the current absolute date/time as VNB. The absence of VNA is a signal for the HOME to use a default offset, determined by policy and out of scope for this document, to add to VNB.

As an example of the use of VNB and VNA, a *Registrant* may set VNB to `null` and VNA to `3600`. The HOME in this instance would use the current absolute time at receipt of the registration request for VNB and then apply the offset specified by VNA to obtain an absolute time for VNA that is `3600` seconds after VNB.

## HOME Aviation Parameters

These parameters are carried over from {{Section 5.2 of RFC9886}}. The content in {{cddl-hap}} carries the same semantics from {{RFC9886}} but is more well-defined in syntax of CDDL.

~~~ ascii-text
uas_type = (uint .le 15) .default 0
uas_ids = [ + [
  id_type: uint .le 15,
  uas_id: bytes .size(20)  
] ]
auth = [ + [
  type: uint .le 15,
  data: bytes .size(1..362)
] ]
self_id = [
  type: uint .size(1),
  description: text .size(23)
]
area = [
  count: (uint .size(1)) .default 1,
  radius: number,
  floor: number,
  ceiling: number
]
classification = [
  type: (uint .le 8) .default 0,
  class: (uint .le 15) .default 0,
  category: (uint .le 15) .default 0
]
operator_id = [
  type: uint .size(1),
  id: bytes .size(20)
]
~~~
{: #cddl-hap title="CDDL: HOME Aviation Parameters"}