# IANA Considerations {#ic}

## Well-Known URIs

IANA is requested to add the following entries in the "Well-Known URIs" registry {{IANA.WellKnownURIs}}.

| URI Suffix | Change Controller | Reference | Status | Related Information |
| ---------- | ----------------- | --------- | ------ | ------------------- |
| register-hhit | IETF | This RFC | permanent | N/A |
| query-hhit | IETF | This RFC | permanent | N/A |
| oaas-hhit | IETF | This RFC | permanent | N/A |
{: title="Additions to Well-Known URIs Registry"}

## CWT & JWT Claims {#claims}

Claims defined for DRIP are compatible with those of CWT and JWT, so the CWT and JWT Claims registries, {{IANA.CWT.Claims}} and {{IANA.JWT.Claims}}, are reused. No new IANA registry is created.

Per this specification, the following values are requested to be added to the "JSON Web Token Claims" registry established by {{RFC7519}} and the "CBOR Web Token (CWT) Claims" registry established by {{RFC8392}}. Each entry is requested to be added to both registries. The "Claim Description", "Change Controller", and "Reference" fields are common and equivalent for the JWT and CWT registries. The "Claim Key" and "Claim Value Type" fields are for the CWT registry only. The "Claim Name" field is as defined for the CWT registry, not the JWT registry. The "JWT Claim Name" field is equivalent to the "Claim Name" field in the JWT registry.

~~~ ascii-text
Claim Name: HHIT Registration Request
Claim Description: HHIT Registration Request
JWT Claim Name: hhit_req
Claim Key: TBD1
Claim Value Type: map
Change Controller: IETF
Reference: This RFC
~~~
{: title="HHIT Registration Request Claim: Registration Form"}

~~~ ascii-text
Claim Name: HHIT Registration Response
Claim Description: HHIT Registration Response
JWT Claim Name: hhit_resp
Claim Key: TBD2
Claim Value Type: map
Change Controller: IETF
Reference: This RFC
~~~
{: title="HHIT Registration Response Claim: Registration Form"}

## RDAP Extensions Registry

IANA is requested to register the following value in the "RDAP Extensions" registry {{IANA.RDAP.Extensions}}.

~~~ ascii-art
Extension Identifier: 
  ome_v0
Registry Operator:
  Any
Specification:
  This specification
Contact:
  IETF <iesg@ietf.org>
Intended Usage:
  This extension is used to convey private information 
  under an HHIT registration.
~~~
{: title="RDAP Extensions: Registration Form"}

## Aviation Application Specific Dynamically Assigned Keys

This document requests IANA create a new registry under {{IANA.DRIP}} called "Aviation Application Specific Dynamically Assigned Keys". This registry is used by applications following {{using-asda}}.

| Label Value | Label Encoding Size | Range Name | Registration Policy | Comments |
| ----------- | ------------------- | ---------- | ------------------- | -------- |
| -2^64 to -25 | -(1+1, 1+2, 1+4, 1+8) | Private (PRIV) | Private Use ({{Section 4.1 of RFC8126}}) | - |
| -24 to -1 & 1 to 23 | -1+0, 1+0 | Application Specific Dynamically Assigned (ASDA) | Unassigned | - |
| 0 | 1+0 | Application Specific Context (ASC) | N/A | - |
| 24 to 2^8-1 | 1+1 | Standard (STD) | Standards Action ({{Section 4.9 of RFC8126}}) | - |
| 2^8 to 2^16-1 | 1+2 | Specification (SPEC) | Specification Required ({{Section 4.6 of RFC8126}}) | - |
| 2^16 to 2^64-1 | 1+4, 1+8 | First Come First Served (FCFS) | First Come First Served ({{Section 4.4 of RFC8126}})| - |
{: #key-table title="Aviation ASDA Keys: Registry Policies"}

### Using ASDA

This section only applies to maps encoded in CBOR. JSON maps use this registry as is using the Name field. 

A map supporting ASDA MUST contain a Label 0; the Application Specific Context (ASC). The value of the ASC MUST be one of the following:

- `null` or `undefined`; representing that the local scope map does not use an ASC
- `nil`; representing that the local scope map uses its parent map ASC
- an integer value ("direct mode"); representing a pointer elsewhere in the registry that has the following rules:
  - values around the pointer, called the context, are referenced based on the `-1+0` and `1+0` encodings
  - MUST NOT let value minus 24 and plus 23 (lower and upper bounds of the context) go out of bounds
  - MUST NOT let lower and upper bounds of the context overlap with the ASDA key range itself
- a string ("indirect mode"); representing a referenced to a relevant specification that defines a curated set of keys from the registry to use for the `-1+0` and `1+0` encodings with the following rules:
  - MUST be in the form `RFC` followed without a space by the RFC number
  - MUST NOT modify an existing key registration in anyway (Name, value, etc.) when part of the context

### Registry Fields

*Key*:
: TBD

*Description*:
: A short description of the entry providing an overview of its semantic meaning and its expected use-cases.

*Name*:
: A string value, to be used as a `key` in the `key: value` pair of a JSON object. No specific rules apply for syntax beyond being a valid JSON string for a object key, but it is recommended to use all lower-case and snake-case with underscores. Care should be given to the length of a Name to reduce wire size of JSON encodings for constrained environments.

*Label*:
: A integer value, ranging from `24 to 2^64-1`, to be used as a key in a CBOR map. Different ranges of values use different registration policies, see {{key-table}}.

*Value Type*:
: CBOR/JSON typing for value under the Key.

*Change Controller*:
: TDB

*Reference*:
: A link to a permanent and readily available specification defining the value syntax and semantics to be used for this key.

### Registration Form

~~~ ascii-art
Key:
Description:
Range Name:
Name:
Label:
Value Type:
Change Controller:
Reference:
~~~
{: #key-form title="Aviation ASDA Keys: Registration Form"}

#### Review Criteria

For a Key the specified value of a new registration should not duplicate the syntax and/or semantics of an existing registration. For the Name parameter of the Key, a new registration MUST NOT duplicate an existing registration Name.

The Range Name parameter of registration is used by the registrant to request a specific area of registration, but is not required to have a field indicating no preferences in the registration.

Value Type MUST be a valid CBOR type or from {{IANA.CBOR.Tags}}. Their typing in JSON is assumed to follow the translation from CBOR to JSON following {{Section 6 of RFC8949}}.

### Initial Values

~~~ ascii-text
{::include figures/ome-iana.txt}
~~~
{: title="General Aviation ASDA Keys"}

~~~ ascii-text
{::include figures/brid-iana.txt}
~~~
{: title="UAS Aviation ASDA Keys"}